Web site
You can use our Web site, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, to obtain supple-
mentary information and to communicate with us. The Web site links to a list of
known errors, solutions to selected exercises and problems, and (of course) a list
explaining the corny professor jokes, as well as other content that we might add.
The Web site also tells you how to report errors or make suggestions.
How we produced this book
Like the second edition, the third edition was produced in L A TEX 2 " . We used the
Times font with mathematics typeset using the MathTime Pro 2 fonts. We thank
Michael Spivak from Publish or Perish, Inc., Lance Carnes from Personal TeX,
Inc., and Tim Tregubov from Dartmouth College for technical support. As in the
previous two editions, we compiled the index using Windex, a C program that we
wrote, and the bibliography was produced with B IB TEX. The PDF files for this
book were created on a MacBook running OS 10.5.
We drew the illustrations for the third edition using MacDraw Pro, with some
of the mathematical expressions in illustrations laid in with the psfrag package
for L A TEX 2 " . Unfortunately, MacDraw Pro is legacy software, having not been
marketed for over a decade now. Happily, we still have a couple of Macintoshes
that can run the Classic environment under OS 10.4, and hence they can run Mac-
Draw Pro—mostly. Even under the Classic environment, we find MacDraw Pro to
be far easier to use than any other drawing software for the types of illustrations
that accompany computer-science text, and it produces beautiful output. 1 Who
knows how long our pre-Intel Macs will continue to run, so if anyone from Apple
is listening: Please create an OS X-compatible version of MacDraw Pro!
Acknowledgments for the third edition
We have been working with the MIT Press for over two decades now, and what a
terrific relationship it has been! We thank Ellen Faran, Bob Prior, Ada Brunstein,
and Mary Reilly for their help and support.
We were geographically distributed while producing the third edition, working
in the Dartmouth College Department of Computer Science, the MIT Computer
1 We investigated several drawing programs that run under Mac OS X, but all had significant short-
comings compared with MacDraw Pro. We briefly attempted to produce the illustrations for this
book with a different, well known drawing program. We found that it took at least five times as long
to produce each illustration as it took with MacDraw Pro, and the resulting illustrations did not look
as good. Hence the decision to revert to MacDraw Pro running on older Macintoshes.Preface
xix
Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, and the Columbia University De-
partment of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research. We thank our re-
spective universities and colleagues for providing such supportive and stimulating
environments.
Julie Sussman, P.P.A., once again bailed us out as the technical copyeditor. Time
and again, we were amazed at the errors that eluded us, but that Julie caught. She
also helped us improve our presentation in several places. If there is a Hall of Fame
for technical copyeditors, Julie is a sure-fire, first-ballot inductee. She is nothing
short of phenomenal. Thank you, thank you, thank you, Julie! Priya Natarajan also
found some errors that we were able to correct before this book went to press. Any
errors that remain (and undoubtedly, some do) are the responsibility of the authors
(and probably were inserted after Julie read the material).
The treatment for van Emde Boas trees derives from Erik Demaine’s notes,
which were in turn influenced by Michael Bender. We also incorporated ideas
from Javed Aslam, Bradley Kuszmaul, and Hui Zha into this edition.
The chapter on multithreading was based on notes originally written jointly with
Harald Prokop. The material was influenced by several others working on the Cilk
project at MIT, including Bradley Kuszmaul and Matteo Frigo. The design of the
multithreaded pseudocode took its inspiration from the MIT Cilk extensions to C
and by Cilk Arts’s Cilk++ extensions to C++.
We also thank the many readers of the first and second editions who reported
errors or submitted suggestions for how to improve this book. We corrected all the
bona fide errors that were reported, and we incorporated as many suggestions as
we could. We rejoice that the number of such contributors has grown so great that
we must regret that it has become impractical to list them all.
Finally, we thank our wives—Nicole Cormen, Wendy Leiserson, Gail Rivest,
and Rebecca Ivry—and our children—Ricky, Will, Debby, and Katie Leiserson;
Alex and Christopher Rivest; and Molly, Noah, and Benjamin Stein—for their love
and support while we prepared this book. The patience and encouragement of our
families made this project possible. We affectionately dedicate this book to them.
