To our colleagues
We have supplied an extensive bibliography and pointers to the current literature.Each chapter ends with a set of chapter notes that give historical details and references. The chapter notes do not provide a complete reference to the whole fieldxvi Preface
of algorithms, however. Though it may be hard to believe for a book of this size,space constraints prevented us from including many interesting algorithms.Despite myriad requests from students for solutions to problems and exercises,we have chosen as a matter of policy not to supply references for problems and exercises, to remove the temptation for students to look up a solution rather than to
find it themselves.
look at it, the book changed either not much or quite a bit.
A quick look at the table of contents shows that most of the second-edition chap-
ters and sections appear in the third edition. We removed two chapters and one
section, but we have added three new chapters and two new sections apart from
these new chapters.
We kept the hybrid organization from the first two editions. Rather than organiz-
ing chapters by only problem domains or according only to techniques, this book
has elements of both. It contains technique-based chapters on divide-and-conquer,
dynamic programming, greedy algorithms, amortized analysis, NP-Completeness,
and approximation algorithms. But it also has entire parts on sorting, on data
structures for dynamic sets, and on algorithms for graph problems. We find that
although you need to know how to apply techniques for designing and analyzing al-
gorithms, problems seldom announce to you which techniques are most amenable
to solving them.
Here is a summary of the most significant changes for the third edition:
 We added new chapters on van Emde Boas trees and multithreaded algorithms,
and we have broken out material on matrix basics into its own appendix chapter.
 We revised the chapter on recurrences to more broadly cover the divide-and-
conquer technique, and its first two sections apply divide-and-conquer to solve
two problems. The second section of this chapter presents Strassen’s algorithm
for matrix multiplication, which we have moved from the chapter on matrix
operations.
 We removed two chapters that were rarely taught: binomial heaps and sorting
networks. One key idea in the sorting networks chapter, the 0-1 principle, ap-
pears in this edition within Problem 8-7 as the 0-1 sorting lemma for compare-
exchange algorithms. The treatment of Fibonacci heaps no longer relies on
binomial heaps as a precursor.Preface
xvii
 We revised our treatment of dynamic programming and greedy algorithms. Dy-
namic programming now leads off with a more interesting problem, rod cutting,
than the assembly-line scheduling problem from the second edition. Further-
more, we emphasize memoization a bit more than we did in the second edition,
and we introduce the notion of the subproblem graph as a way to understand
the running time of a dynamic-programming algorithm. In our opening exam-
ple of greedy algorithms, the activity-selection problem, we get to the greedy
algorithm more directly than we did in the second edition.
 The way we delete a node from binary search trees (which includes red-black
trees) now guarantees that the node requested for deletion is the node that is
actually deleted. In the first two editions, in certain cases, some other node
would be deleted, with its contents moving into the node passed to the deletion
procedure. With our new way to delete nodes, if other components of a program
maintain pointers to nodes in the tree, they will not mistakenly end up with stale
pointers to nodes that have been deleted.
