What are algorithms? Why is the study of algorithms worthwhile? What is the role
of algorithms relative to other technologies used in computers? In this chapter, we
will answer these questions.
1.1 Algorithms
Informally, an algorithm is any well-defined computational procedure that takes
some value, or set of values, as input and produces some value, or set of values, as
output. An algorithm is thus a sequence of computational steps that transform the
input into the output.
We can also view an algorithm as a tool for solving a well-specified computa-
tional problem. The statement of the problem specifies in general terms the desired
input/output relationship. The algorithm describes a specific computational proce-
dure for achieving that input/output relationship.
For example, we might need to sort a sequence of numbers into nondecreasing
order. This problem arises frequently in practice and provides fertile ground for
introducing many standard design techniques and analysis tools. Here is how we
formally define the sorting problem:
Input: A sequence of n numbers ha 1 ; a 2 ; : : : ; a n i.
Output: A permutation (reordering) ha 1 0 ; a 2 0 ; : : : ; a n 0 i of the input sequence such
that a 1 0  a 2 0      a n 0 .
For example, given the input sequence h31; 41; 59; 26; 41; 58i, a sorting algorithm
returns as output the sequence h26; 31; 41; 41; 58; 59i. Such an input sequence is
called an instance of the sorting problem. In general, an instance of a problem
consists of the input (satisfying whatever constraints are imposed in the problem
statement) needed to compute a solution to the problem.6
Chapter 1 The Role of Algorithms in Computing
Because many programs use it as an intermediate step, sorting is a fundamental
operation in computer science. As a result, we have a large number of good sorting
algorithms at our disposal. Which algorithm is best for a given application depends
on—among other factors—the number of items to be sorted, the extent to which
the items are already somewhat sorted, possible restrictions on the item values,
the architecture of the computer, and the kind of storage devices to be used: main
memory, disks, or even tapes.
An algorithm is said to be correct if, for every input instance, it halts with the
correct output. We say that a correct algorithm solves the given computational
problem. An incorrect algorithm might not halt at all on some input instances, or it
might halt with an incorrect answer. Contrary to what you might expect, incorrect
algorithms can sometimes be useful, if we can control their error rate. We shall see
an example of an algorithm with a controllable error rate in Chapter 31 when we
study algorithms for finding large prime numbers. Ordinarily, however, we shall
be concerned only with correct algorithms.
An algorithm can be specified in English, as a computer program, or even as
a hardware design. The only requirement is that the specification must provide a
precise description of the computational procedure to be followed.
