Following an introductory chapter, Chapter 1, the book is organized into five parts:
Part One: Computer Security Technology and Principles: This part covers tech-
nical areas that must underpin any effective security strategy. Chapter 2 lists
the key cryptographic algorithms, discusses their use, and discusses issues of
strength. The remaining chapters in this part look at specific technical areas of
computer security: authentication, access control, database and cloud security,
malicious software, denial of service, intrusion detection, and firewalls.
Part Two: Software Security and Trusted Systems: This part covers issues
concerning software development and implementation, including operat-
ing systems, utilities, and applications. Chapter 10 covers the perennial issue
of ­buffer overflow, while Chapter 11 examines a number of other software
security issues. Chapter 12 takes an overall look at operating system security.
The final chapter in this part deals with trusted computing and multilevel
security, which are both software and hardware issues.
Part Three: Management Issues: This part is concerned with management
aspects of information and computer security. Chapters 14 and 15 focus
specifically on management practices related to risk assessment, the setting up
of security controls, and plans and procedures for managing computer ­security.
Chapter 16 looks at physical security measures that must complement the
technical security measures of Part One. Chapter 17 examines a wide range of
human factors issues that relate to computer security. A vital management tool
is security auditing, examined in Chapter 18. Finally, Chapter 19 examines legal
and ethical aspects of computer security.
Part Four: Cryptographic Algorithms: Many of the technical measures that
support computer security rely heavily on encryption and other types of cryp-
tographic algorithms. Part Four is a technical survey of such algorithms.
Part Five: Internet Security: This part looks at the protocols and standards
used to provide security for communications across the Internet. Chapter 22
discusses some of the most important security protocols for use over the
Internet. Chapter 23 looks at various protocols and standards related to
authentication over the Internet. Chapter 24 examines important aspects of
wireless security.
A number of online appendices cover additional topics relevant to the book.
	 0.2	 A Roadmap for Readers and Instructors
This book covers a lot of material. For the instructor or reader who wishes a shorter
treatment, there are a number of alternatives.0.3 / Support For Cissp Certification   3
To thoroughly cover the material in the first two parts, the chapters should
be read in sequence. If a shorter treatment in Part One is desired, the reader may
choose to skip Chapter 5 (Database Security).
Although Part Two covers software security, it should be of interest to users
as well as system developers. However, it is more immediately relevant to the latter
category. Chapter 13 (Trusted Computing and Multilevel Security) may be consid-
ered optional.
The chapters in Part Three are relatively independent of one another, with
the exception of Chapters 14 (IT Security Management and Risk Assessment)
and 15 (IT Security Controls, Plans, and Procedures). The chapters can be read
in any order and the reader or instructor may choose to select only some of the
chapters.
Part Four provides technical detail on cryptographic algorithms for the inter-
ested reader.
Part Five covers Internet security and can be read at any point after Part One.
	 0.3	 Support For Cissp Certification
This book provides coverage of all the subject areas specified for CISSP (Certified
Information Systems Security Professional) certification.
As employers have come to depend on in-house staff to manage and develop
security policies and technologies, and to evaluate and manage outside security
services and products, there is a need for methods for evaluating candidates.
Increasingly, employers are turning to certification as a tool for guaranteeing that
a potential employee has the required level of knowledge in a range of security
areas.
The international standard ISO/IEC 17024 (General Requirements for Bodies
Operating Certification of Persons) defines the following terms related to certification:
	
	
	
•	 Certification process: All activities by which a certification body establishes
that a person fulfills specified competence requirements.
•	 Certification scheme: Specific certification requirements related to specified
categories of persons to which the same particular standards and rules, and the
same procedures apply.
•	 Competence: Demonstrated ability to apply knowledge and/or skills and,
where relevant, demonstrated personal attributes, as defined in the certifica-
tion scheme.
The CISSP designation from the International Information Systems Security
Certification Consortium (ISC) 2 , a nonprofit organization, is often referred to as
the “gold standard” when it comes to information security certification. It is the
only universally recognized certification in the security industry [SAVA03]. Many
organizations, including the U.S. Department of Defense and many financial insti-
tutions, now require that cyber security personnel have the CISSP certification
[DENN11]. In 2004, CISSP became the first IT (Information Technology) program
to earn accreditation under ISO/IEC 17024.
