ction) and, if successful, leads to an undesirable violation of security, or threat
consequence. The agent carrying out the attack is referred to as an attacker, or
threat agent. We can distinguish two types of attacks:
	
	
•	 Active attack: An attempt to alter system resources or affect their operation.
•	 Passive attack: An attempt to learn or make use of information from the sys-
tem that does not affect system resources.
We can also classify attacks based on the origin of the attack:
	
	
•	 Inside attack: Initiated by an entity inside the security perimeter (an ­“insider”).
The insider is authorized to access system resources but uses them in a way not
approved by those who granted the authorization.
•	 Outside attack: Initiated from outside the perimeter, by an unauthorized or
illegitimate user of the system (an “outsider”). On the Internet, potential
outside attackers range from amateur pranksters to organized criminals, inter-
national terrorists, and hostile governments.
Finally, a countermeasure is any means taken to deal with a security attack.
Ideally, a countermeasure can be devised to prevent a particular type of attack from
succeeding. When prevention is not possible, or fails in some instance, the goal is to
detect the attack and then recover from the effects of the attack. A countermeas-
ure may itself introduce new vulnerabilities. In any case, residual vulnerabilities
may remain after the imposition of countermeasures. Such vulnerabilities may be
exploited by threat agents representing a residual level of risk to the assets. Owners
will seek to minimize that risk given other constraints.
	 1.2	 Threats, Attacks, and Assets
We now turn to a more detailed look at threats, attacks, and assets. First, we look at
the types of security threats that must be dealt with, and then give some examples of
the types of threats that apply to different categories of assets.
Threats and Attacks
Table 1.2, based on RFC 4949, describes four kinds of threat consequences and lists
the kinds of attacks that result in each consequence.
Unauthorized disclosure is a threat to confidentiality. The following types of
attacks can result in this threat consequence:
	
•	 Exposure: This can be deliberate, as when an insider intentionally releases
sensitive information, such as credit card numbers, to an outsider. It can also
be the result of a human, hardware, or software error, which results in an ­entity
gaining unauthorized knowledge of sensitive data. There have been numerous
instances of this, such as universities accidentally posting student confidential
information on the Web.
