S oftware   Software includes the operating system, utilities, and application
programs. A key threat to software is an attack on availability. Software, especially
application software, is often easy to delete. Software can also be altered or
damaged to render it useless. Careful software configuration management, which
includes making backups of the most recent version of software, can maintain high
availability. A more difficult problem to deal with is software modification that
results in a program that still functions but that behaves differently than before,
which is a threat to integrity/authenticity. Computer viruses and related attacks fall
into this category. A final problem is protection against software piracy. Although
Computer system
Computer system
4 Sensitive files
must be secure
Data (file security)
Data
3 Data must be
securely transmitted
through networks
(network security)
1 Access to the data
must be controlled
(protection)
Processes representing users
Guard
Processes representing users
Guard
2 Access to the computer
facility must be controlled
(user authentication)
Users making requests
Figure 1.2  Scope of Computer Security
Note: This figure depicts security concerns other than physical security, including controlling of
access to computers systems, safeguarding of data transmitted over communications systems, and
safeguarding of stored data.1.2 / Threats, Attacks, and Assets   23
Table 1.3  Computer and Network Assets, with Examples of Threats
Availability
Confidentiality
Integrity
Hardware Equipment is stolen or
disabled, thus denying
service. An unencrypted
CD-ROM or DVD is
stolen. Software Programs are deleted,
denying access to users. An unauthorized copy of
software is made. A working program is modi-
fied, either to cause it to fail
during execution or to cause
it to do some unintended task.
Data Files are deleted,
denying access to users. An unauthorized read
of data is performed. An
analysis of statistical data
reveals underlying data. Existing files are modified or
new files are fabricated.
Messages are destroyed or
deleted. Communication
lines or networks are
rendered unavailable. Messages are read. The
traffic pattern of
messages is observed. Messages are modified,
delayed, reordered, or dupli-
cated. False messages are
fabricated.
Communication
Lines and
Networks
certain countermeasures are available, by and large the problem of unauthorized
copying of software has not been solved.
D ata   Hardware and software security are typically concerns of computing center
professionals or individual concerns of personal computer users. A much more
widespread problem is data security, which involves files and other forms of data
controlled by individuals, groups, and business organizations.
Security concerns with respect to data are broad, encompassing availability,
secrecy, and integrity. In the case of availability, the concern is with the destruction
of data files, which can occur either accidentally or maliciously.
The obvious concern with secrecy is the unauthorized reading of data files or
databases, and this area has been the subject of perhaps more research and effort
than any other area of computer security. A less obvious threat to secrecy involves
the analysis of data and manifests itself in the use of so-called statistical databases,
which provide summary or aggregate information. Presumably, the existence of
aggregate information does not threaten the privacy of the individuals involved.
However, as the use of statistical databases grows, there is an increasing potential
for disclosure of personal information. In essence, characteristics of constituent
individuals may be identified through careful analysis. For example, if one table
records the aggregate of the incomes of respondents A, B, C, and D and another
records the aggregate of the incomes of A, B, C, D, and E, the difference between
the two aggregates would be the income of E. This problem is exacerbated by the
increasing desire to combine data sets. In many cases, matching several sets of data
for consistency at different levels of aggregation requires access to individual units.
Thus, the individual units, which are the subject of privacy concerns, are available at
various stages in the processing of data sets.
Finally, data integrity is a major concern in most installations. Modifications
to data files can have consequences ranging from minor to disastrous.24    Chapter 1 / Overview
C ommunication L ines and N etworks   Network security attacks can be classified
as passive attacks and active attacks. A passive attack attempts to learn or make
use of information from the system but does not affect system resources. An active
attack attempts to alter system resources or affect their operation.
Passive attacks are in the nature of eavesdropping on, or monitoring of, trans-
missions. The goal of the attacker is to obtain information that is being transmitted.
Two types of passive attacks are the release of message contents and traffic analysis.
The release of message contents is easily understood. A telephone conver-
sation, an electronic mail message, and a transferred file may contain sensitive or
confidential information. We would like to prevent an opponent from learning the
contents of these transmissions.
A second type of passive attack, traffic analysis, is subtler. Suppose that we
had a way of masking the contents of messages or other information traffic so that
opponents, even if they captured the message, could not extract the information
from the message. The common technique for masking contents is encryption. If we
had encryption protection in place, an opponent might still be able to observe the
pattern of these messages. The opponent could determine the location and identity
of communicating hosts and could observe the frequency and length of messages
being exchanged. This information might be useful in guessing the nature of the
communication that was taking place.
Passive attacks are very difficult to detect because they do not involve any
alteration of the data. Typically, the message traffic is sent and received in an
apparently normal fashion and neither the sender nor receiver is aware that a
third party has read the messages or observed the traffic pattern. However, it is
feasible to prevent the success of these attacks, usually by means of encryption.
Thus, the emphasis in dealing with passive attacks is on prevention rather than
detection.
Active attacks involve some modification of the data stream or the creation
of a false stream and can be subdivided into four categories: replay, masquerade,
modification of messages, and denial of service.
Replay involves the passive capture of a data unit and its subsequent retrans-
mission to produce an unauthorized effect.
A masquerade takes place when one entity pretends to be a different entity. A
masquerade attack usually includes one of the other forms of active attack. For exam-
ple, authentication sequences can be captured and replayed after a valid authentica-
tion sequence has taken place, thus enabling an authorized entity with few privileges
to obtain extra privileges by impersonating an entity that has those privileges.
Modification of messages simply means that some portion of a legitimate
message is altered, or that messages are delayed or reordered, to produce an
unauthorized effect. For example, a message stating, “Allow John Smith to read
confidential file accounts” is modified to say, “Allow Fred Brown to read confiden-
tial file accounts.”
The denial of service prevents or inhibits the normal use or management of
communication facilities. This attack may have a specific target; for example, an
entity may suppress all messages directed to a particular destination (e.g., the ­security
audit service). Another form of service denial is the disruption of an entire network,
