This definition introduces three key objectives that are at the heart of computer
security:
	
•	 Confidentiality: This term covers two related concepts:
		 — Data confidentiality: 1 Assures that private or confidential information is
not made available or disclosed to unauthorized individuals.
		 — Privacy: Assures that individuals control or influence what information
related to them may be collected and stored and by whom and to whom
that information may be disclosed.
	
•	 Integrity: This term covers two related concepts:
		 — Data integrity: Assures that information and programs are changed only
in a specified and authorized manner.
		 — System integrity: Assures that a system performs its intended function in
an unimpaired manner, free from deliberate or inadvertent unauthorized
manipulation of the system.
	
•	 Availability: Assures that systems work promptly and service is not denied to
authorized users.
These three concepts form what is often referred to as the CIA triad. The three
concepts embody the fundamental security objectives for both data and for informa-
tion and computing services. For example, the NIST standard FIPS 199 (Standards
for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems) lists
confidentiality, integrity, and availability as the three security objectives for infor-
mation and for information systems. FIPS 199 ­provides a useful characterization of
these three objectives in terms of requirements and the definition of a loss of secu-
rity in each category:
•	 Confidentiality: Preserving authorized restrictions on information access and
disclosure, including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary in-
formation. A loss of confidentiality is the unauthorized disclosure of ­information.
•	 Integrity: Guarding against improper information modification or destruction,
including ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity. A loss of
integrity is the unauthorized modification or destruction of information.
•	 Availability: Ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information.
A loss of availability is the disruption of access to or use of information or an
information system.
	
	
	
Although the use of the CIA triad to define security objectives is well estab-
lished, some in the security field feel that additional concepts are needed to present
a complete picture. Two of the most commonly mentioned are as follows:
•	 Authenticity: The property of being genuine and being able to be verified and
trusted; confidence in the validity of a transmission, a message, or message
	
1
RFC 4949 defines information as “facts and ideas, which can be represented (encoded) as various forms
of data,” and data as “information in a specific physical representation, usually a sequence of symbols
that have meaning; especially a representation of information that can be processed or produced by a
computer.” Security literature typically does not make much of a distinction; nor does this book.14    Chapter 1 / Overview
originator. This means verifying that users are who they say they are and that
each input arriving at the system came from a trusted source.
•	 Accountability: The security goal that generates the requirement for actions
of an entity to be traced uniquely to that entity. This supports nonrepudiation,
deterrence, fault isolation, intrusion detection and prevention, and after-action
recovery and legal action. Because truly secure systems are not yet an achiev-
able goal, we must be able to trace a security breach to a responsible party.
Systems must keep records of their activities to permit later forensic analysis to
trace security breaches or to aid in transaction disputes.
	
Note that FIPS 199 includes authenticity under integrity.
Examples
We now provide some examples of applications that illustrate the requirements just
enumerated. 2 For these examples, we use three levels of impact on organizations or
individuals should there be a breach of security (i.e., a loss of confidentiality, integrity,
or availability). These levels are defined in FIPS 199:
•	 Low: The loss could be expected to have a limited adverse effect on organiza-
tional operations, organizational assets, or individuals. A limited adverse ­effect
means that, for example, the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability
might (i) cause a degradation in mission capability to an extent and duration
that the organization is able to perform its primary functions, but the effec-
tiveness of the functions is noticeably reduced; (ii) result in minor damage to
organizational assets; (iii) result in minor financial loss; or (iv) result in minor
harm to individuals.
•	 Moderate: The loss could be expected to have a serious adverse effect on
organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals. A serious
adverse effect means that, for example, the loss might (i) cause a significant
degradation in mission capability to an extent and duration that the organiza-
tion is able to perform its primary functions, but the effectiveness of the func-
tions is significantly reduced; (ii) result in significant damage to organizational
assets; (iii) result in significant financial loss; or (iv) result in significant harm
to individuals that does not involve loss of life or serious, life-threatening
injuries.
•	 High: The loss could be expected to have a severe or catastrophic adverse
effect on organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals. A
severe or catastrophic adverse effect means that, for example, the loss might
(i) cause a severe degradation in or loss of mission capability to an extent
and duration that the organization is not able to perform one or more of its
primary functions; (ii) result in major damage to organizational assets; (iii)
result in major financial loss; or (iv) result in severe or catastrophic harm to
individuals involving loss of life or serious life-threatening injuries.
