Legal, regulations, investigations, and compliance: The types of computer
crime laws and regulations. The measures and technologies used to investigate
computer crime incidents.
•	 Operations security: Used to identify the controls over hardware, media,
and the operators and administrators with access privileges to any of these
resources. Audit and monitoring are the mechanisms, tools, and facilities that
permit the identification of security events and subsequent actions to identify
the key elements and report the pertinent information to the appropriate indi-
vidual, group, or process.
•	 Physical (environmental) security: Provides protection techniques for the
entire facility, from the outside perimeter to the inside office space, including
all of the information system resources.
•	 Security architecture and design: Contains the concepts, principles, structures,
and standards used to design, monitor, and secure operating systems, equip-
ment, networks, applications, and those controls used to enforce various levels
of availability, integrity, and confidentiality.
•	 Telecommunications and network security: Covers network structures; trans-
mission methods; transport formats; security measures used to provide avail-
ability, integrity, and confidentiality; and authentication for transmissions over
private and public communications networks and media.
In this book, we cover each of these domains in some depth.
	 0.4	 Support for Nsa/Dhs Certification
The U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) and the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) jointly sponsor the National Centers of Academic Excellence in
Information Assurance/Cyber Defense (IA/CD). The goal of these programs is6    Chapter 0 / Reader’s and Instructor’s Guide
to reduce vulnerability in our national information infrastructure by promoting
higher education and research in IA and producing a growing number of profes-
sionals with IA expertise in various disciplines. To achieve that purpose, NSA/DHS
have defined a set of Knowledge Units for 2- and 4-year institutions that must be
supported in the curriculum to gain a designation as a NSA/DHS National Center
of Academic Excellence in IA/CD. Each Knowledge Unit is composed of a mini-
mum list of required topics to be covered and one or more outcomes or learning
objectives. Designation is based on meeting a certain threshold number of core and
optional Knowledge Units.
In the area of computer security, the 2014 Knowledge Units document
[NCAE13] lists the following core Knowledge Units:
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	 Cyber defense: Includes access control, cryptography, firewalls, intrusion de-
tection systems, malicious activity detection and countermeasures, trust rela-
tionships, and defense in depth.
•	 Cyber threats: Includes types of attacks, legal issues, attack surfaces, attack
trees, insider problems, and threat information sources.
•	 Fundamental security design principles: A list of 12 principles, all of which are
covered in Section 1.4 of this book.
•	 Information assurance fundamentals: Includes threats and vulnerabilities,
intrusion detection and prevention systems, cryptography, access control
models, identification/authentication, and audit.
•	 Introduction to cryptography: Includes symmetric cryptography, public-key
cryptography, hash functions, and digital signatures.
•	 Databases: Includes an overview of databases, database access controls, and
security issues of inference.
This book provides extensive coverage in all of these areas. In addition, the
book partially covers a number of the optional Knowledge Units.
