Computer Science Student Resource Site
William Stallings also maintains the Computer Science Student Resource Site, at
ComputerScienceStudent.com. The purpose of this site is to provide documents,
information, and links for computer science students and professionals. Links and
documents are organized into five categories:0.7 / Standards   9
	
	
	
	
	
•	 Math: Includes a basic math refresher, a queuing analysis primer, a number
system primer, and links to numerous math sites.
•	 How-to: Advice and guidance for solving homework problems, writing technical
reports, and preparing technical presentations.
•	 Research resources: Links to important collections of papers, technical
reports, and bibliographies.
•	 Other useful: A variety of other useful documents and links.
•	 Computer science careers: Useful links and documents for those considering a
career in computer science.
Other Web Sites
Numerous Web sites provide information related to the topics of this book. The
Companion Website provides links to these sites, organized by chapter.
There are a number of worthwhile Web-based forums dealing with aspects of
computer security. The Companion Web site provides links to these.
	 0.7	 Standards
Many of the security techniques and applications described in this book have been
specified as standards. Additionally, standards have been developed to cover man-
agement practices and the overall architecture of security mechanisms and services.
Throughout this book, we describe the most important standards in use or that are
being developed for various aspects of computer security. Various organizations
have been involved in the development or promotion of these standards. The most
important (in the current context) of these organizations are as follows:
	
	
	
•	 National Institute of Standards and Technology: NIST is a U.S. federal agency
that deals with measurement science, standards, and technology related to
U.S. government use and to the promotion of U.S. private sector innovation.
Despite its national scope, NIST Federal Information Processing Standards
(FIPS) and Special Publications (SP) have a worldwide impact.
•	 Internet Society: ISOC is a professional membership society with worldwide
organizational and individual membership. It provides leadership in address-
ing issues that confront the future of the Internet and is the organization home
for the groups responsible for Internet infrastructure standards, including the
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the Internet Architecture Board
(IAB). These organizations develop Internet standards and related specifica-
tions, all of which are published as Requests for Comments (RFCs).
•	 ITU-T: The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is an interna-
tional organization within the United Nations System in which governments
and the private sector coordinate global telecom networks and services. The
ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is one of the three
sectors of the ITU. ITU-T’s mission is the production of standards cover-
ing all fields of telecommunications. ITU-T standards are referred to as
Recommendations.10    Chapter 0 / Reader’s and Instructor’s Guide
•	 ISO: The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 1 is a world-
