Since the second edition of this book was published, the field has seen continued innovations
and improvements. In this new edition, we try to capture these changes while maintaining a
broad and comprehensive coverage of the entire field. To begin the process of revision, the
second edition of this book was extensively reviewed by a number of professors who teach
the subject and by professionals working in the field. The result is that in many places the
narrative has been clarified and tightened, and illustrations have been improved.
Beyond these refinements to improve pedagogy and user-friendliness, there have
been major substantive changes throughout the book. The most noteworthy changes are as
follows:
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	 Fundamental security design principles: Chapter 1 includes a new section discussing the
security design principles listed as fundamental by the National Centers of Academic
Excellence in Information Assurance/Cyber Defense, which is jointly sponsored by the
U.S. National Security Agency and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
•	 Attack surfaces and attack trees: Chapter 1 includes a new section describing these two
concepts, which are useful in evaluating and classifying security threats.
•	 User authentication model: Chapter 3 includes a new description of a general model
for user authentication, which helps to unify the discussion of the various approaches
to user authentication.
•	 Attribute-based access control (ABAC): Chapter 4 has a new section devoted to
ABAC, which is becoming increasingly widespread.
•	 Identity, credential, and access management (ICAM): Chapter 4 includes a new sec-
tion on ICAM, which is a comprehensive approach to managing and implementing
digital identities (and associated attributes), credentials, and access control.
•	 Trust frameworks: Chapter 4 includes a new section on the Open Identity Trust
Framework, which is an open, standardized approach to trustworthy identity and attri-
bute exchange that is becoming increasingly widespread.
•	 SQL injection attacks: Chapter 5 includes a new section on the SQL injection attack,
which is one of the most prevalent and dangerous network-based security threats.
•	 Cloud security: The material on cloud security in Chapter 5 has been updated and
expanded to reflect its importance and recent developments.
•	 Malware: The material on Malware, and on categories of intruders, has been revised to
reflect the latest developments, including details of Advanced Persistent Threats, which
are most likely due to nation state actors.
•	 Intrusion detection/intrusion prevention systems: The material on IDS/IPS has been
updated to reflect new developments in the field, including the latest developments in
Host-Based Intrusion Detection Systems that assist in implementing a defense-in-depth
strategy.
xiiPreface   xiii
	
	
	
•	 Human resources: Security lapses due to human factors and social engineering are of
increasing concern, including several recent cases of massive data exfiltration by insid-
ers. Addressing such lapses requires a complex mix of procedural and technical con-
trols, which we review in several significantly revised sections.
•	 Mobile device security: Mobile device security has become an essential aspect of enter-
prise network security, especially for devices in the category known as bring your own
device (BYOD). A new section in Chapter 24 covers this important topic.
•	 SHA-3: This recently adopted cryptographic hash standard is covered in a new
appendix.
