For many instructors, an important component of a computer security course is a project
or set of projects by which the student gets hands-on experience to reinforce concepts from
the text. This book provides an unparalleled degree of support for including a projects com-
ponent in the course. The instructor’s support materials available through Pearson not only
include guidance on how to assign and structure the projects but also include a set of user’s
manuals for various project types plus specific assignments, all written especially for this
book. Instructors can assign work in the following areas:
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
•	 Hacking exercises: Two projects that enable students to gain an understanding of the
issues in intrusion detection and prevention.
•	 Laboratory exercises: A series of projects that involve programming and experiment-
ing with concepts from the book.
•	 Security education (SEED) projects: The SEED projects are a set of hands-on exer-
cises, or labs, covering a wide range of security topics.
•	 Research projects: A series of research assignments that instruct the student to research
a particular topic on the Internet and write a report.
•	 Programming projects: A series of programming projects that cover a broad range of
topics and that can be implemented in any suitable language on any platform.
•	 Practical security assessments: A set of exercises to examine current infrastructure and
practices of an existing organization.
•	 Firewall projects: A portable network firewall visualization simulator is provided,
together with exercises for teaching the fundamentals of firewalls.
•	 Case studies: A set of real-world case studies, including learning objectives, case
description, and a series of case discussion questions.Preface   xvii
	
	
	
•	 Reading/report assignments: A list of papers that can be assigned for reading and writ-
ing a report, plus suggested assignment wording.
•	 Writing assignments: A list of writing assignments to facilitate learning the material.
•	 Webcasts for teaching computer security: A catalog of webcast sites that can be used to
enhance the course. An effective way of using this catalog is to select, or allow the student
to select, one or a few videos to watch, and then to write a report/analysis of the video.
This diverse set of projects and other student exercises enables the instructor to use the
book as one component in a rich and varied learning experience and to tailor a course plan to
meet the specific needs of the instructor and students. See Appendix A in this book for details.
Acknowledgments
This new edition has benefited from review by a number of people, who gave generously of
their time and expertise. The following professors and instructors reviewed all or a large part
of the manuscript: Stefan Robila (Montclair State University), Weichao Wang (University
of North Carolina, Charlotte), Bob Brown (Southern Polytechnic State University), Leming
Zhou (University of Pittsburgh), Yosef Sherif (Mihaylo College of Business and Economics),
Nazrul Islam (Farmingdale State University), Qinghai Gao (Farmingdale State University),
Wei Li (Nova Southeastern University), Jeffrey Kane (Nova Southeastern University), Philip
John Lunsford II (East Carolina University), Jeffrey H. Peden (Longwood University), Ratan
Guha (University of Central Florida), Sven Dietrich (Stevens Institute of Technology), and
David Liu (Purdue University, Fort Wayne).
Thanks also to the many people who provided detailed technical reviews of one or
more chapters: Umair Manzoor (UmZ), Adewumi Olatunji (FAGOSI Systems, Nigeria),
Rob Meijer, Robin Goodchil, Greg Barnes (Inviolate Security LLC), Arturo Busleiman
(Buanzo Consulting), Ryan M. Speers (Dartmouth College), Wynand van Staden (School
of Computing, University of South Africa), Oh Sieng Chye, Michael Gromek, Samuel
Weisberger, Brian Smithson (Ricoh Americas Corp, CISSP), Josef B. Weiss (CISSP),
Robbert-Frank Ludwig (Veenendaal, ActStamp Information Security), William Perry,
Daniela Zamfiroiu (CISSP), Rodrigo Ristow Branco, George Chetcuti (Technical Editor,
TechGenix), Thomas Johnson (Director of Information Security at a banking holding com-
pany in Chicago, CISSP), Robert Yanus (CISSP), Rajiv Dasmohapatra (Wipro Ltd), Dirk
Kotze, Ya’akov Yehudi, and Stanley Wine (Adjunct Lecturer, Computer Information Systems
Department, Zicklin School of Business, Baruch College).
Dr. Lawrie Brown would first like to thank Bill Stallings for the pleasure of work-
ing with him to produce this text. I would also like to thank my colleagues in the School of
Engineering and Information Technology, UNSW Canberra at the Australian Defence Force
Academy for their encouragement and support.
Finally, we would like to thank the many people responsible for the publication of the
book, all of whom did their usual excellent job. This includes the staff at Pearson, particularly
our editor Tracy Dunkelberger, program manager Carole Snyder, and production manager
Bob Engelhardt. We also thank the production staff at Jouve India for another excellent and
rapid job. Thanks also to the marketing and sales staff at Pearson, without whose efforts this
book would not be in your hands.
