There are a number of ways of classifying and characterizing the ­countermeasures
that may be used to reduce vulnerabilities and deal with threats to system assets.
It will be useful for the presentation in the remainder of the book to look at ­several
approaches, which we do in this and the next two sections. In this ­section, we view coun-
termeasures in terms of functional requirements, and we follow the ­classification
defined in FIPS 200 (Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and
Information Systems). This standard enumerates 17 security-related areas with
regard to protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information
systems and the information processed, stored, and transmitted by those systems.
The areas are defined in Table 1.4.
The requirements listed in FIPS 200 encompass a wide range of counter-
measures to security vulnerabilities and threats. Roughly, we can divide these coun-
termeasures into two categories: those that require computer security technical
measures (covered in this book in Parts One and Two), either hardware or software,
or both; and those that are fundamentally management issues (covered in Part Three).
Each of the functional areas may involve both computer security techni-
cal measures and management measures. Functional areas that primarily require
computer security technical measures include access control, identification and
authentication, system and communication protection, and system and information
integrity. Functional areas that primarily involve management controls and proce-
dures include awareness and training; audit and accountability; certification, accredi-
tation, and security assessments; contingency planning; maintenance; physical and
environmental protection; planning; personnel security; risk assessment; and systems
and services acquisition. Functional areas that overlap computer security technical
measures and management controls include configuration management, incident
response, and media protection.
Note that the majority of the functional requirements areas in FIPS 200 are
either primarily issues of management or at least have a significant management
component, as opposed to purely software or hardware solutions. This may be new
to some readers and is not reflected in many of the books on computer and informa-
tion security. But as one computer security expert observed, “If you think technology
can solve your security problems, then you don’t understand the problems and you26    Chapter 1 / Overview
Table 1.4  Security Requirements
Access Control: Limit information system access to authorized users, processes acting on behalf of authorized
users, or devices (including other information systems) and to the types of transactions and functions that
authorized users are permitted to exercise.
Awareness and Training: (i) Ensure that managers and users of organizational information systems are made
aware of the security risks associated with their activities and of the applicable laws, regulation, and policies
related to the security of organizational information systems; and (ii) ensure that personnel are adequately
trained to carry out their assigned information security-related duties and responsibilities.
Audit and Accountability: (i) Create, protect, and retain information system audit records to the
extent needed to enable the monitoring, analysis, investigation, and reporting of unlawful, unauthorized,
or inappropriate information system activity; and (ii) ensure that the actions of individual information
system users can be uniquely traced to those users so they can be held accountable for their
actions.
Certification, Accreditation, and Security Assessments: (i) Periodically assess the security controls in
organizational information systems to determine if the controls are effective in their application; (ii) develop
and implement plans of action designed to correct deficiencies and reduce or eliminate vulnerabilities in
organizational information systems; (iii) authorize the operation of organizational information systems and any
associated information system connections; and (iv) monitor information system security controls on an
ongoing basis to ensure the continued effectiveness of the controls.
Configuration Management: (i) Establish and maintain baseline configurations and inventories of
organizational information systems (including hardware, software, firmware, and documentation)
throughout the respective system development life cycles; and (ii) establish and enforce security
configuration settings for information technology products employed in organizational information
systems.
Contingency Planning: Establish, maintain, and implement plans for emergency response, backup opera-
tions, and postdisaster recovery for organizational information systems to ensure the availability of critical
information resources and continuity of operations in emergency situations.
Identification and Authentication: Identify information system users, processes acting on behalf of users, or
devices, and authenticate (or verify) the identities of those users, processes, or devices, as a prerequisite to
allowing access to organizational information systems.
Incident Response: (i) Establish an operational incident-handling capability for organizational information
systems that includes adequate preparation, detection, analysis, containment, recovery, and user-response
activities; and (ii) track, document, and report incidents to appropriate organizational officials and/or
authorities.
Maintenance: (i) Perform periodic and timely maintenance on organizational information systems; and (ii)
provide effective controls on the tools, techniques, mechanisms, and personnel used to conduct information
system maintenance.
Media Protection: (i) Protect information system media, both paper and digital; (ii) limit access to informa-
tion on information system media to authorized users; and (iii) sanitize or destroy information system media
before disposal or release for reuse.
Physical and Environmental Protection: (i) Limit physical access to information systems, equipment, and
the respective operating environments to authorized individuals; (ii) protect the physical plant and support
infrastructure for information systems; (iii) provide supporting utilities for information systems; (iv) protect
information systems against environmental hazards; and (v) provide appropriate environmental controls in
facilities containing information systems.
Planning: Develop, document, periodically update, and implement security plans for organizational informa-
tion systems that describe the security controls in place or planned for the information systems and the rules
of behavior for individuals accessing the information systems.
(Continued)1.4 / Fundamental Security Design Principles   27
Personnel Security: (i) Ensure that individuals occupying positions of responsibility within organizations
(including third-party service providers) are trustworthy and meet established security criteria for those
positions; (ii) ensure that organizational information and information systems are protected during and after
personnel actions such as terminations and transfers; and (iii) employ formal sanctions for personnel failing to
comply with organizational security policies and procedures.
Risk Assessment: Periodically assess the risk to organizational operations (including mission, functions,
image, or reputation), organizational assets, and individuals, resulting from the operation of organizational
information systems and the associated processing, storage, or transmission of organizational information.
Systems and Services Acquisition: (i) Allocate sufficient resources to adequately protect organizational
information systems; (ii) employ system development life cycle processes that incorporate information
security considerations; (iii) employ software usage and installation restrictions; and (iv) ensure that third-
party providers employ adequate security measures to protect information, applications, and/or services
outsourced from the organization.
System and Communications Protection: (i) Monitor, control, and protect organizational communications
(i.e., information transmitted or received by organizational information systems) at the external boundaries
and key internal boundaries of the information systems; and (ii) employ architectural designs, software devel-
opment techniques, and systems engineering principles that promote effective information security within
organizational information systems.
System and Information Integrity: (i) Identify, report, and correct information and information system flaws
in a timely manner; (ii) provide protection from malicious code at appropriate locations within organizational
information systems; and (iii) monitor information system security alerts and advisories and take appropriate
actions in response.
